Proposal: API to Query Side Panel Layout (#838)
hober/web-extensions: proposals/getposition-sidepanel.md

# Add API to Query Side Panel Layout

**Summary**

Proposal to introduce a programmatic way to query the Side panel position.

**Document Metadata**

**Author:** [hharshas](https://github.com/hharshas)

**Sponsoring Browser:** Chromium

**Contributors:** [hharshas](https://github.com/hharshas)
([Summer Of Code](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/)), mentor: oliverdunk, solomonkinard

**Created:** 2025-05-27

> **Related Issues:** [#chromium](https://issues.chromium.org/issues/406511291)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Related Issues:** https://issues.chromium.org/issues/406511291
```

## Motivation

### Objective

* Browsers may offer users the ability to change which side of the browser
  the side panel opens on. In Chrome, this is exposed at `chrome://settings`.

>   This can include side panels registered by the extensions using the sidePanel API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This can include side panels registered by the extensions using the `sidePanel` API.
```

* We should add a way to query this so the developer can adjust their UI
  based on the position.

#### Use Cases

Programmatic Control: 
* For example, having phrasing or visuals that depend on the relative position of the page.

### Known Consumers

The Chromium bug has some amount of developer interest. This item is under
consideration by Chrome among work items for Summer of Code.

## Specification

### Schema

```typescript
namespace sidePanel {
    // Possible side panel positions
    enum Side {
        LEFT = "left",
        RIGHT = "right"
    }

    interface PanelPosition {
        side: Side;
    }

    // Example function declarations

>     function getPosition(): Promise<PanelPosition>;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    function getLayout(): Promise<PanelLayout>;
```

As discussed offline, let's change this to `getLayout()`. Also open to other suggestions, but I think getPosition() is a little too specific.

}
```

### Return value

> * Type: Promise<void>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Type: `Promise<PanelPosition>`
```

# Add API to Query Side Panel Position

**Summary**

Proposal to introduce a programmatic way to query the Side panel position.

**Document Metadata**

**Author:** [hharshas](https://github.com/hharshas)

**Sponsoring Browser:** Chromium

**Contributors:** [hharshas](https://github.com/hharshas)
([Summer Of Code](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/)), mentor: oliverdunk, solomonkinard

**Created:** 2025-05-27

**Related Issues:** [#chromium](https://issues.chromium.org/issues/406511291)

## Motivation

### Objective

> * At `chrome://settings`, it is possible to change the "Side panel position"

Reviewer 3: We should be careful about when we reference Chrome specifically, since we want to motivate why this makes sense across all browsers. I would just mention this as one approach, for example:

> Browsers may offer users the ability to change which side of the browser the side panel opens on. In Chrome, this is exposed at chrome://settings.

  which affects which side of the browser the side panel UI opens on. This
  can include panels registered by the developer using the sidePanel API.
* We should add a way to query this so the developer can adjust their UI
  based on the position.

#### Use Cases

Programmatic Control: 
* For example, having phrasing or visuals that depend on the relative position of the page.

### Known Consumers

The Chromium bug has some amount of developer interest. This item is under
consideration by Chrome among work items for Summer of Code.

## Specification

### Schema

```typescript
namespace sidePanel {

>  namespace sidePanel {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

  // Possible side panel positions
  enum PanelPosition {
    LEFT = "left",
    RIGHT = "right"
  };

  interface Functions {
    // Returns the current position of the side panel.

>     static Promise<PanelPosition> getPosition();

Reviewer 3: In the future, Chrome or other browser vendors might have different information to expose about the position. Regardless of if we use `PanelSettings`, let's also make `PanelPosition` a dictionary and then we can call the enum something like `Side` which can be a single key in that.

So for example:

```ts
enum Side {
    LEFT = "left",
    RIGHT = "right"
}

interface PanelPosition {
    side: Side;
}
```

    
    // Alternative approach for future extensibility (open for discussion).

>     dictionary PanelSettings {

Reviewer 3: It looks like there is a mix of TypeScript and IDL-like syntax here. Can you adjust this to be valid TypeScript, for example removing the Functions interface and using a type or interface for PanelSettings? Feel free to reach out to me or Solomon if you need assistance.

      PanelPosition position;
      // Future settings could be added here.
    };
    
    static Promise<PanelSettings> getSettings();
  };
};
```

### Return value

* Type: Promise<void>
* Resolves when it returns the panel position.

### Behavior

* Returns the current position as set in browser settings.
* No context option is needed as the setting is same for all the context.

### New Permissions

N/A

### Manifest File Changes

N/A

## Security and Privacy

### Exposed Sensitive Data

This API does not expose any sensitive data.

### Abuse Mitigations

The API is fetching only the side panel position.

### Additional Security Considerations

N/A

## Alternatives

### Existing Workarounds

> So far, nothing works. The DOM of the side panel and the

Reviewer 3: I don't think one is going to be found so let's be more definitive.

```suggestion
There are currently no workarounds. The DOM of the side panel and the
```

content script are separate, so even if we detect the resize
event when the side panel is opened, we can't determine the
panel's position. It will be interesting to see other's

> approaches in the comments of this PR.

Reviewer 3: Let's remove "It will be interesting to see other's approaches in the comments of this PR." since this document will live far beyond the relevance of this PR :)
